Fix: Update scope document and also fix a few sphinx bugs (#162)
pyOpenSci/software-peer-review: about/package-scope.md

technical and applied scope of our organization. This scope may expand over time
as the organization grows.

## Is Your Package in Scope For pyOpenSci Review?

pyOpenSci reviews packages that fall within a list of specified categories and
domains. Packages must also meet our technical scope requirements.

If you are unsure whether your package is in scope for review, please
open a [pre-submission inquiry using a GitHub Issue](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-review/issues/new?assignees=&labels=0%2Fpresubmission&template=presubmission-inquiry.md&title=) to get feedback from
one of our editors. We are happy to look at your package and help you understand
whether it is in scope or not.

### About the types of packages that we review

pyOpenSci reviews packages that support open reproducible science,
data processing and and the various stages of managing the
data lifecycle. Packages submitted to pyOpenSci should fit into one or
more of the categories below and should be within our technical scope.

> ```{admonition} Package Use Metrics Are Not a Requirement for Review

Reviewer: This suggests "we don't need you to go and measure your package use (but we may consider how much it is used)".  Rather: "Widespread package usage is not required for review", "We review independent of popularity", or similar?

Author: many thanks @stefanv fixing. @NickleDave i think had similar feedback here and i haven't been able to get it right!

Author: is this any better :

Your Package Does Not Need to Have Widespread Use to be Reviewed
:class: important

We review packages across a spectrum of small to large user bases. The popularity of your package is not a consideration in our review process!

@NickleDave

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me!

nit: would maybe say it like "Your Package Does Not Need to Be In Widespread Use Yet to be Reviewed" or "Your Package Does Not Need to Be Widely Used to be Reviewed"? ("in use" not "have use")

Author: this was merged a few hours ago... would you be open to creating a PR for this - i'm fine with cleaner wording.

Reviewer 2: Yup, sorry, was catching up with replies

:class: important

When we evaluate whether you package is within our scope, we only consider:

1. how the package is developed and

> 2. how the package relates to and supports the broader scientific ecosystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. how the package relates to and supports the broader scientific ecosystem.
```

pyOpenSci does not evaluate how much community use your package has.
As such, the number of GitHub stars or PyPI / Conda

> downloads is NOT considered as a part of our scope evaluation.

Reviewer: This is very explicit, but unsure it adds much content.

Reviewer: If you're worried about users being confused at this point already, perhaps it's worth clarifying *WHY* you are reviewing in the first place. It's not to establish how useful a package is, but how well it is put together.  This is a subtle change of emphasis on the "we only consider" clause above.

Author: ok and now i'm here - 

We review packages with the goal of improving package quality and usability for scientists. 
As such, we review packages across a spectrum of small to large user bases. The popularity of your package is not a consideration in our review process! 

When we evaluate whether you package is within our scope, we only consider:

1. how the package is developed and
2. how the package relates to and supports the broader scientific ecosystem

We welcome young packages that are just entering the scientific Python
ecosystem to apply for review if they are relevant to the science community and
fit into at least one scope category below. We also welcome mature packages with
a growing or established community!

We welcome young packages that are just entering the scientific Python
ecosystem to apply for review if they are relevant to the science community and
fit into at least one scope category below. We also welcome mature packages with
a growing or established community!
```

If you are unsure whether your package fits into one of the general or
statistical categories, please open an issue as a [pre-submission inquiry](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/new?assignees=&labels=0%2Fpresubmission&template=presubmission-inquiry.md&title=).

```{note}
This is a living document. The categories below may change through time.
This may mean in some cases, some previously peer review-accepted packages
may not be in-scope today. We strive for consistency in our peer review process. However, we also evaluate packages on a case-by-case basis.
In some cases exceptions are made.
```

## Package categories

> The following categories are the current domain areas that fall into the
> pyOpenSci domain scope. Note that your package should have some level of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following are the current categories that fall into scope for 
pyOpenSci. In addition to fitting into one or more of these categories, your package should have some level of
```

demonstrated scientific application. This could be a use case that you can
link to or a tutorial that demonstrates its potential application for science.

Below we provide examples of packages from pyOpenSci ecosystem. Because we
have growing community of packages, in some cases we link to R packages
within the rOpenSci community that match the category scope for reference.

We will update this page as our review process evolves.

```{note}
Many of the example packages below perform tasks that might fit in multiple
categories. There examples are there to provide you with a flavor of the types
of packages that would fall into that category.
```

### Data retrieval
Packages for accessing and downloading data from online sources. This category
includes wrappers for accessing APIs.

Our definition of scientific applications is broad, including data storage
services, journals, and other remote servers, as many data sources may be of
interest to scientists. However, retrieval packages should be focused on data
sources / topics, rather than services. For example a general client for Amazon
Web Services data storage would not be in-scope.

> * Examples: [OpenOmics](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/31)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Examples: [OpenOmics](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/31), [pyDov](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/19), [Physcraper](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-review/issues/26)
```

Author: thank you so so much!!

### Data extraction

These packages aid in retrieving data from unstructured sources such as text,
images, and PDFs. They might also parse scientific data types and outputs from
scientific equipment.

* Examples: [devicely](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/37), [jointly](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/45)

### Data processing & munging

> Data munging tools are tools that support processing data discussed above. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data [munging tools transform data in a way that makes further analysis possible (as [defined on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_wrangling)). Munging complements the other categories so it's common for packages to include some functionality to munge data. This
```

category focuses on tools for handling data in specific formats that scientists
may be interested in working with. These data may also be generated from
scientific workflows or exported from instruments and wearables.

> * Examples: [physcraper](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/26)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Examples: [devicely](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/37), [jointly](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/45), [MovingPandas](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/18), [OpenOmics](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/31), [Physcraper](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/26)
```

### Data deposition

Tools for depositing data into scientific research repositories.

* Examples: [This is an example from rOpenSci - eml](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/80)

### Data validation and testing:

Tools that enable automated validation and checking of data quality and
completeness. These tools should be able to support scientific workflows.

* Example: [pandera](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/12)

### Scientific software wrappers

Scientific software wrappers refer to packages that provide a Python interface
for existing scientific packages written in other languages.

These packages should have a clear scientific application. Wrappers must provide
significant added value to the scientific ecosystem be it in data handling, or
improved installation processes for Python users.

We strongly encourage submissions that wrap tools that are open-source with
an OSI-approved license. Exceptions will be evaluated case-by-case,
considering whether open-source options exist.

<!-- TODO: need an example for this category -->

> * Examples: We don't have a package in this category yet - *Could be your package?*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Examples: [PyGMT](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/43)
```

<!-- TODO: marting git package is a good example but it's needs to be sunsetted as it's no longer maintained. hamilton is just starting review but would fit
well here  - the link below for it is a presubmission not a review   -->
* Examples: [Hamilton - currently under review](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/74), martin's git package (that is no longer maintained.)

### Citation management and bibliometrics:

Tools that facilitate managing references, such as for writing manuscripts,
creating CVs or otherwise attributing scientific contributions, or accessing,
manipulating or otherwise working with bibliometric data. (Example: [Example from rOpenSci - RefManageR](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/119))

### Data visualization & analysis
These are packages that enhance a scientists experience visualizing and
analyzing data.

* Examples: [PyGMT - (also spatial and data munging)](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/43),

### Database software bindings

 Bindings and wrappers for database APIs.

 * Example: [Example from rOpenSci - rrlite](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/6)

## Domain areas

> In addition, our scope includes focused domain areas. These areas are based on

Reviewer: The "computational library" class, described here, seems to be missing from the previous section, when it's arguably the first category included?

Reviewer 2: Say a little bit more about what you mean?  
I think you're suggesting that there should be another category above that's like "general library or framework for a domain or research area"?
E.g. [python-graphblas](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/81) would be such a library (in addition to being a wrapper)

Author: ugh... i missed a few comments here! i will make sure these are added in a separate PR. i am not sure how i missed this

partnerships that we form with communities and also expertise that we hold
within our organization. As we develop [new community partnerships](/partners/scientific-communities) and grow,
we will expand this list.

### Geospatial

Packages focused on the retrieval, manipulation, and analysis of spatial data.

* Examples: [PyGmt](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/43),
[Moving Pandas ](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/18)

### Pangeo

We have a [partnership with Pangeo](../partners/pangeo). Often times packages submitted as a part of that partnership are also in the geospatial domain.

* Examples: [xclim - under review now](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/73)

### Education

Packages to aid with instruction.

> <!--TODO -  Earthpy fit in this category but it also needs to be sunsetted -->

Reviewer 2: Examples: [pyrolite](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/20)

Author: oh they did tag their package as being education focused too. it's not explicitly used for teaching but should we add it here?

Author: added!

## Package technical scope

To be in technical scope for a pyOpenSci review, your package:

* Should have maintenance workflows documented.
* Should declare vendor dependencies using standard approaches rather than including code from other packages within your repository.
* Should not have an exceedingly complex structure. Others should be able to contribute and/or take over maintenance if needed.

```{admonition} pyOpenSci's goal is to support long(er) term maintenance
pyOpenSci has a goal of supporting long term maintenance of open source
Python tools. It is thus important for us to know that if you need to step down as a maintainer, the package infrastructure and documentation is
in place to support us finding a new maintainer who can take over you
package's maintenance.
```

> ### Telemetry & user-informed consent

Author: I am going to pull this into it's own PR so we can link it explicitly to the open issues and discussion.

Your package should avoid collecting usage analytics. With
that in mind, we understand that package-use data can be invaluable for the
development process. If the package does collect such data, it should do so
by prioritizing user-informed-consent. This means that before any data are
collected, the user understands:

1. What data are collected
2. How the data are collected.
3. What you plan to do with the data
4. How and where the data are stored

Once the user is informed of what will be collected and how that data will be handled, stored and used, you can implement `opt-in` consent. `opt-in` means that the user agrees to usage-data collection prior to it being collected (rather than having to opt-out when using your package).

We will evaluate usage data collected by packages on a case-by-case basis
and reserve the right not to review a package if the data collection is overly
invasive.

> ### Notes on scope categories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What if my package seems like its category or domain is out of scope?
```

Reviewer 2: Since this is `<h3>` it seems like it's mean to be part of the "domain" section (the last `<h2>`) but this also seems like it could apply to the "category" section (`<h2>` above this)

Scientific software wrappers refer to packages that provide a Python interface
for existing scientific packages written in other languages.

These packages should have a clear scientific application. Wrappers must provide
significant added value to the scientific ecosystem be it in data handling, or
improved installation processes for Python users.

We strongly encourage submissions that wrap tools that are open-source with
an OSI-approved license. Exceptions will be evaluated case-by-case,
considering whether open-source options exist.

<!-- TODO: need an example for this category -->
* Examples: We don't have a package in this category yet - *Could be your package?*

### Workflow automation & versioning
Tools that automate and link together workflows and as such support
reproducible workflows. These
tools may include build systems and tools to manage continuous integration.
This also includes tools that support version control.

<!-- TODO: marting git package is a good example but it's needs to be sunsetted as it's no longer maintained. hamilton is just starting review but would fit
well here  - the link below for it is a presubmission not a review   -->

> * Examples: [Hamilton - currently under review](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/74), martin's git package (that is no longer maintained.)

Author: other examples? i think martin's package is likely not what we want here

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is a place where we want to give non-pyOpenSci examples?  
E.g., snakemake, luigi, some other tools listed here? https://github.com/common-workflow-language/common-workflow-language/wiki/Existing-Workflow-systems

Author: ok i added snakemake and pygithub! and noted we have't reviewed them. we do need to be a bit careful about what falls into "scientific" here... but i think for now we can start and see what we get with this definition.

### Education

Packages to aid with instruction.
<!--TODO -  Earthpy fit in this category but it also needs to be sunsetted -->

## Package technical scope

To be in technical scope for a pyOpenSci review, your package:

* Should have maintenance workflows documented.
* Should declare vendor dependencies using standard approaches rather than including code from other packages within your repository.
* Should not have an exceedingly complex structure. Others should be able to contribute and/or take over maintenance if needed.

```{admonition} pyOpenSci's goal is to support long(er) term maintenance
pyOpenSci has a goal of supporting long term maintenance of open source
Python tools. It is thus important for us to know that if you need to step down as a maintainer, the package infrastructure and documentation is
in place to support us finding a new maintainer who can take over you
package's maintenance.
```

### Telemetry & user-informed consent

Your package should avoid collecting usage analytics. With
that in mind, we understand that package-use data can be invaluable for the
development process. If the package does collect such data, it should do so

> by prioritizing user-informed-consent. This means that before any data are

Author: from @yuvipanda - user-informed-consent and use "usage analytics" to define what is being collected.

collected, the user understands:

1. What data are collected
2. How the data are collected.

> 3. How the data are used

Reviewer: Not sure this is very helpful, unless they declare doing something nefarious, which they won't.  Personally, I'd filter on what they collect, and simply not let them have data I don't want them to use (in whatever fashion).

Instead of "how it is used", perhaps this goes more towards intent; what do you plan to do with the data?

Author: good point. would:
This makes sense. better to be explicit

```suggestion
3. What you plan to do with the data
```

> 4. How and where the data are stored

Author: from @stefanv possibly allow the user to view what is being sent (locally - good enough) or at it's endpoint storage (best) - i'm interpreting following good-better-best

> This often entails `opt-in` consent to collect data. `opt-in` means that the

Reviewer: Always, not often? I can't think how the user could be considered informed if they did not opt in.

Author: true... Maybe something like:

Once the user is informed about what data are being collected and how the data are handled, you can then implement opt-in consent.

> This often entails `opt-in` consent to collect data. `opt-in` means that the
> user, once informed of what will be collected, and how/where that data is
> stored, needs to agree to such collection prior to it being collected.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Once the user is informed of what will be collected and how that data will be handled, stored and used, you can implement `opt-in` consent. `opt-in` means that the user agrees to usage-data collection prior to it being collected (rather than having to opt-out when using your package).

```

> We will evaluate telemetry data collected by packages on a case-by-case basis

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will evaluate usage data collected by packages on a case-by-case basis
```

> and reserve the right to not review a package if the data collection is overly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and reserve the right not to review a package if the data collection is overly
```

technical and applied scope of our organization. This scope may expand over time
as the organization grows.

> ## Is Your Package in Scope For pyOpenSci Review?

Author: @eriknw @NickleDave @arianesasso @cmarmo @sneakers-the-rat @Batalex i'd LOVE your input on these changes. this page is really the only one you have to look at in this review. the rest of the changes are just link fixes and cleanup. 

Many thanks in advance for this!

> pyOpenSci only reviews packages that fall within our specified domain and

Reviewer 2: Should we keep the term "categories" for types of packages and instead only talk about "domains" when we mean fields of study (like in the sense "domain expertise") like earth science, genomics, etc?

If we overload the word "domain" then it will might confuse readers when we use it to refer to "field of study" specifically.

I kind of prefer the way rOpenSci uses the term "package categories" exactly because it avoids mixing two different meaning of "domain"

So this would be "fall within our specified category and technical scope"

Author: definitely agreed. will be more clear with that fix.

one of our editors. We are happy to look at your package and help you understand
whether it is in scope or not.

## About the scope of packages that we review

pyOpenSci supports packages that support both open reproducible science,
data processing and and the various stages of managing the
data lifecycle. Packages submitted to pyOpenSci should fit into one or

> more of the categories below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more of the categories below and should be within our technical scope.
```

Based on the header level and the language I understand this section be a segue into talking about two things: "categories" and "technical scope". If that's correct than maybe rephrase to be a bit higher level, "I'm about to tell you about two things that both are part of our scope". As it's currently written I'm not quite clear why we need both this section and the previous one since they both talk about scope generally and include a callout to the presubmisson form. (I think you want to make sure that's the first thing someone reads before you give a detailed description of scope?)

Author: ok so i'm reworking this. then maybe you can do another top to bottom review and see if it makes more sense / edit as needed?!

```{admonition} Package Use Metrics Are Not a Requirement for Review
:class: important

> pyOpenSci has no requirements surrounding the volume community use of your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pyOpenSci has no requirements surrounding the community use of your
```
Not quite sure what's meant by "volume community use" here"
"volume of downloads or community use", something like that?

package.

> If your package is well developed, the number of GitHub stars or PyPI or conda

Reviewer 2: This could sound like "but if your package is not well developed we're going to start looking at metrics".
Maybe "We only consider how your package is developed as part of our evaluation for scope, NOT ..."

Author: ok i've rewritten.

downloads is NOT considered as a part of our scope evaluation.

We welcome young packages that are just entering the scientific Python
ecosystem to apply for review if they are relevant to the science community and
fit into at least one scope category below.

> ```

Author: awesome!! thanks!! i realized last night that we probably want to mention that we also welcome more mature packages. otherwise we will get the question " our question is mature with a growing user base, are we in scope?" :)

If you are unsure whether your package fits into one of the general or

> statistical categories, please open an issue as a pre-submission inquiry (Examples). <todo add link>

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to add the link! :grimacing:

Author: oh goodness. i missed my own reminder didn't i?!  fixed!

```{note}
This is a living document. The categories below may change through time.
This may mean in some cases, some previously peer review-accepted packages
may not be in-scope today. We strive for consistency in our peer review process. However, we also evaluate packages on a case-by-case basis.
In some cases exceptions are made.
```

> 

Author: NOTE: i think we should add a policy around telemetry in packages. a current review has it. i think we should discourage against it but if it's required make it opt in rather than opt out preferred?

We should also evaluate whether we want to review general data manipulation and coding tools. ROS does not review these tools. but defining what that means is tricky.

Reviewer: Perhaps start with a narrower scope? It's easy to broaden it later, but not the other way around.

Author: good point! is this a specific comment related to our scope as defined now or just to that statement above? I added that given Ropensci has similar language and it just allows us to adjust in the future in case we realize we are headed down a rabbit hole that doesn't work for us! (kind of like a legal disclaimer :) in case we need to modify scope)

We've had the same scope for the past 4 years BUT of course we are being more specific now about each category given all of the questions we've gotten :)

> ## Package scope categories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Package categories
```
nit: maybe just make this "Package categories" to simplify and repeat "scope" less in the headers? Or if you want paralleilsm in the headers maybe make this one "Scope: package categories" and the technical one "Scope: technical"

Author: fixed!

> The following categories are the current domain areas that fall into the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following categories are the current domain areas that fall into the
```
As stated above, feels like we're mixing the meaning of "category" and "domain" here. One effect of this is it makes less sense when we talk about domains like geospatial below.

Author: great point! i'd love help with language to clean this up! i'll keep going and then will make a list of things below that maybe would be faster for you to go through and edit inline?

pyOpenSci domain scope. Note that your package should have some level of
demonstrated scientific application. This could be a use case that you can
link to or a tutorial that demonstrates its potential application for science.

Below we provide examples of packages from pyOpenSci ecosystem. Because we
have growing community of packages, in some cases we link to R packages
within the rOpenSci community that match the category scope for reference.

We will update this page as our review process evolves.

```{note}
Many of the example packages below perform tasks that might fit in multiple

> categories. There are just there to provide you with a flavor of the types

Author: that sounds great! @NickleDave are you open to suggesting these changes in line once i push up this round of edits? i really like this suggestion and think it will enhance the scope page greatly!

> categories. There are just there to provide you with a flavor of the types

Author: i see how the language is also a bit awkward so feel free to rewrite..

of packages that would fall into that category.
```

### Data retrieval
Packages for accessing and downloading data from online sources. This category
includes wrappers for accessing APIs.

Our definition of scientific applications is broad, including data storage
services, journals, and other remote servers, as many data sources may be of
interest to scientists. However, retrieval packages should be focused on data
sources / topics, rather than services.

> *For example a general client for Amazon Web Services data storage would not be in-scope.*

Author: fixed!

* Examples: [OpenOmics](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/31)

> 

Reviewer 2: Could add PyDOV as an example here too, and physcraper (repeating myself, sry)

Author: no worries - i'm gonna push a bunch of these edits and then ask you to go through and add these elements!! i'd appreciate the help :) !

### Data extraction

These packages aid in retrieving data from unstructured sources such as text,
images, and PDFs. They might also parse scientific data types and outputs from
scientific equipment.

* Examples: [devicely](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/37), [jointly](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/45)

### Data processing & munging

> Data munging tools are tools that support processing data discussed above. This

Author: absolutely - want to fix inline please?

category focuses on tools for handling data in specific  formats that scientists
may be interested in working with. These data may also be generated from
scientific workflows or exported from instruments and wearables.

* Examples: [physcraper](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/26)

### Data deposition

Tools for depositing data into scientific research repositories.

* Examples: [This is an example from rOpenSci - eml](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/80)

### Data validation and testing:

Tools that enable automated validation and checking of data quality and
completeness. These tools should be able to support scientific workflows.

* Example: [pandera](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/12)

### Scientific software wrappers

Scientific software wrappers refer to packages that provide a Python interface
for existing scientific packages written in other languages.

These programs must be specific to scientific domains and not general computing

> utilities. Wrappers must provide significant added value to the scientific

Reviewer 4: "not general computing utilities" is a little awkward to me. What is a general computing utility? Compression? Database ORM or connector? NumPy/pandas/xarray? I like your example above about general AWS client is out of scope. A general tool like compression, though, can be primarily developed and useful for scientific applications. So, I think this is a fine needle to try to thread.

"not general computing utilities" clause _may_ be okay as is, b/c I don't know how to improve it. Let me illustrate why this is awkward. If a data utility is created by scientists to serve their specific needs, but they decide to do a little more work to make it _generic_, isn't that a good thing to be rewarded?

Heck, maybe "must be specific to scientific domains" is also too strong. Perhaps something like "must be essential to".

(I'm probably over-thinking this).

Author: i think if you are "over thinking" (which you are not) / questioning then someone else will too. What if we removed the general computing part and just said something like... 

these programs should have clear application to scientific applications?

I think what we don't want is some python utility tool that is cool but also somethign that a scientist would likely not ever use / find useful. SO maybe language around demonstrated or clear application to open science is better language?

Reviewer 4: I like "these programs should have clear application to scientific applications?" :)

Author: awesome! ok i'll fix this. many thanks! 👐

Author: ok i have this now - 

_These packages should have a clear scientific application. Wrappers must provide 
significant added value to the scientific ecosystem be it in data handling, or 
improved installation processes for Python users._

I know that ropensci does have language around general data utilities NOT being in scope but here i am having a hard time defining what that means. so perhaps we start with a clear scientific application and as edge cases come up we can re-evaluate and adjust language!!

ecosystem be it in data handling, or improved installation processes for
Python users.

We strongly encourage submissions that wrap tools that are open-source and

> using an OSI-approved license. Exceptions will be evaluated case-by-case,

Author: perfect! much better. thanks!

considering whether open-source options exist.

<!-- TODO: need an example for this category -->

> * Examples: We don't have a package in this category yet - *Could be your package?*

Author: i think so. pyGMT actually fits into several of our categories i think i just placed it in one. but if we implement your suggestion above then we demonstrate that a package can be in several categories. i'm fine with that!

> ### Workflow Automation & versioning

Reviewer 4: For consistency, "Automation" doesn't need to be capitalized.

Author: fixed! thanks!

Tools that automate and link together workflows and as such support
reproducible workflows. These
tools may include build systems and tools to manage continuous integration.
This also includes tools that support version control.

<!-- TODO: marting git package is a good example but it's needs to be sunsetted as it's no longer maintained. hamilton is just starting review but would fit
well here  - the link below for it is a presubmission not a review   -->
* Examples: [Hamilton - currently under review](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/74), martin's git package (that is no longer maintained.)

### Citation management and bibliometrics:

Tools that facilitate managing references, such as for writing manuscripts,
creating CVs or otherwise attributing scientific contributions, or accessing,
manipulating or otherwise working with bibliometric data. (Example: [Example from rOpenSci - RefManageR](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/119))

### Data visualization & analysis
These are packages that enhance a scientists experience visualizing and
analyzing data.

> * Examples: [PyGmt - (also spatial and data munging)](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/43),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Examples: [PyGMT - (also spatial and data munging)](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/43),
```
I think "GMT" is all caps

> ### Database software bindings

Reviewer 4: Really? I find this a little surprising 🤷

Author: oh - tell me how your interpreted this please. 

I think i can write more... but i'm thinking about tools that connect to databases and allow for data transfer and manipulation. I suspect there are many storing data in cloud based or other databases, postgres, mysql, even airtable etc. 

Let me know your thoughts so i can better clarify this! maybe software bindings are not the right words

Reviewer 4: Of course science needs data, and databases are great tools to deal with data. I'm curious about example Python packages that could be in scope. Several tools are more "business-y", "web stack-y", or "enterprise-y", but it's a wide gamut that can also include science-y tools. Would any of these be in scope (found randomly via google search)?
- https://python.libhunt.com/categories/241-database-drivers
- https://gitee.com/shine_forever/awesome-python#database

If the developers of a database tool feel that they belong in pyOpenSci and not some other community, I don't want to discourage them. My impression though is that many don't come from scientific backgrounds, but this is not universally true.

Would [Ibis](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis) be an example package that would be within scope?

Author: Ok i didn't respond to this because i wasn't sure i had an answer (and i still dont!! 😆 ) i am going to see how ropensci handles "general utilities" because i'm struggling with defining what is general - you are right there is a line that is easy to lose track of between what is a "science-y" tool vs a more general tool!! i think this relates to your question about about wrappers...

Author: i think ibis would be in scope because it is thinking about dataframes and references dask, dplyr (r) but those other packages in the links you have above i think would be out of scope / too general for us to review. for instance we wouldn't ever review the requests library i think? that is super general. Similarly a mysql library seems too general too unless it interfaces with a specific data format and pushes to a database... i'm not exactly sure how to use words to describe the difference between the two however? 

maybe we are back to clear scientific focused application? or that targets scientific users? thoughts?

 Bindings and wrappers for database APIs.

 * Example: [Example from rOpenSci - rrlite](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/6)

## Specialty topics

> In addition, we have some specialty topics with a broad domain focused scope.

Reviewer 5: Maybe adding something here about the fact that we hope to enlarge the coverage to other specialties?

Author: Great suggestion! fixed!

* Examples: [xclim - under review now](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/software-submission/issues/73)

### Education

Packages to aid with instruction.
<!--TODO -  Earthpy fit in this category but it also needs to be sunsetted -->

## Package technical scope

To be in technical scope for a pyOpenSci review, your package:

* Should have maintenance workflows documented.
* Should be structured in a way that someone else could contribute to it.
* Should declare vendor dependencies using standard approaches rather than including code from other packages within your repository.

### Notes on scope categories
- pyOpenSci is still developing as a community. If your scientific Python
package does not fit into one of the categories or if you have any other
questions, we'd encourage you to open a pre-submission inquiry. We're happy to help.
- Data visualization packages come in many varieties, ranging from small
hyper-specific methods for one type of data to general, do-it-all packages
(e.g. matplotlib). pyOpenSci accepts packages that are somewhere in between the
two. If you're interested in submitting your data visualization package, please

> open a pre-submission inquiry first.

Author: great question! that image is at the top of this page. 
this used to be an embed but now it's all one page - have a look here for context:
https://www.pyopensci.org/software-peer-review/about/package-scope.html

Yes - we do want presubmissions for data viz packages - i'm open to adjusting. essentially with ropensci it was hard because they have some core plotting tools like ggplot. and there are SO many different data viz packages we want to be careful about what we actually review. i am not sure how this will work out. so far we have gotten packages that perform data viz but are NOT actually data viz only packages. so some of this is a trial to see what types of packages we recieve.

With that in mind i could remove the presubmission for data viz packages statement ? or we just leave it and see what happens. 

let me know what you think!

> open a pre-submission inquiry first.

Reviewer 6: Let's see how this plays out. The rate of package submission seems manageable at the moment, but the final word should go to the editors-in-chief

> open a pre-submission inquiry first.

Author: agreed... i think this entire document will evolve as our editorial process evolves. so i like that idea of seeing how it pans out!

## Python package technical scope

> pyOpenSci may continue to update its technical scope criteria for package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pyOpenSci may continue to update its criteria for technical scope 
```
nit: suggest rephrasing to avoid noun stack "technical scope criteria"

review as more packages with varying structural approaches are reviewed.
Your package **may not be in technical scope** for us to review at this time if

> fits any of the out-of-technical-scope criteria listed below.

Reviewer 2: For me this is a bit confusing: "your package may not be in technical scope if it fits any of the out-of-technical-scope"
(nit: it's also kind of tautological and repetitive)

Should we have some criteria for what **is** in scope? And then contrast those with the examples below?

E.g.:
- in scope
  - pure Pyton
  - Python with built extensions
  - Python package that can be built with conda package from community channels such as conda-forge, bioconda, etc.
- out of scope: exceedingly complex in terms of structure or maintenance needs
  - this is difficult to define but we provide two examples

Author: i like this. I've been thinking about this because in some ways this part of our policy is very specific to  a single package that we looked at. The generalized statement might be something like... 

the package needs to be setup in a way that another maintainer can (Easily?) step in and take over. ... you know something to that effect? because that is core to our mission. so the complexity needs to be well documented, justified and implementable by someone new. What do you think about some combination of that message PLUS what you wrote above which i like?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think it makes sense to (a) preface with your language about what one of the goals of a good development workflow is --it's easy to take over maintenance-- then (b) restate concretely as I did

also possibly link to the schematic you're developing for packaging tools ("for example, if you're unsure about packaging workflows see this guide")

Author: totally... ok i've updated. i'll add graphics i think later - that one is still in progress but i think it's a great idea!! we just need to get that packaging info online first :)

```{important}

**If the code base of your package is exceedingly complex in terms of

> structure of maintenance needs**, we may not be able to review it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
structure or maintenance needs**, we may not be able to review it.
```
should this be "or" not "of"?
